---
layout: post
title: "Madhyamika Shunyavada"
subtitle: "How Nagarjuna saw zero as something more than just void?"
tags: ["philosophy"]
readtime: true
---

Buddha's silence on ten metaphysical question led to the development of over a hundred Buddhism school after he passed away. Although, even if he hadn't remained silent, I don't expect any different outcome as language in itself is so ambiguous that it can be interpreted by different people differently. We can see the same pattern in Vedanta as well where Shankaracharya gave a dramatically different philosophy from Madhavacharya even though both intepreted the same Vedanta.

One of the most philosophically profound schools of Buddhism is Madhyamika Shunyavada. Ashvaghosha is said to have pioneered it in Buddhacarita and Nagarjuna developed it philosophically to its epitome in Madhyamikasastra. Nagarjuna is said to have been an extremely learned man. Apart from Shunyavada, he has contributed to a lot of diverse fields like Chemistry, Jyotisha (vedic astrology), and Ayurveda. His dialectic and argument skills are so vivid in Madhyamikasastra where he didn't just give a philosophy but a metaphilosophy making everything we think about reality crumble like a palace of cards kept on sand.

Shunyavada has been seen by philosophers across the globe as nihilism but that is a gross misinterpretation arising from wrongly understanding Shunya (zero) as void or emptiness. Nagarjuna doesn't see Shunya as emptiness but as something more. In the world we live in, our intellect understands the world through the lens of subject object dualism:
- If there's an object, there's a subject
- If there's light, there's darkness
- If there's one, there's zero

But, what is darkness? Light is a substance in itself but darkness is not a material substance, which means it's not a metaphysical reality. But how can a thing that isn't real cause immense fear? If we change the definition of a substance from something that is material to something that can cause an effect, darkness becomes a substance. Thus, while darkness is technically just absence of light, taking away all the light doesn't leave an empty void. This means that darkness can be thought of as a substratum on which light appears. This substratum is best defined as what remains once all light is removed but any we can't define it any further. 

Our limited intellect can only understand darkness in relation to light as we define it as absence of light or zero light. As we saw, this absence doesn't leave an empty void, but what it leaves behind is indescribable. Similarly, Nagarjuna interprets Shunya as not "void" but "devoid and indescribable". An incomplete understanding of Shunya has led to a lot of philosophers condemning Shunyavada as nihilism or skepticism.

Nagarjuna says that the phenomenal world (Samvriti Satya) we exist in is where Buddha's teaching of Nirvana, Pratitya Samutpada, and four noble truths apply. Before going ahead, it's important to note that in Indian Philosophy, something is consider real if it is eternal, that is, it's existence is absolute and independent.  On the other hand, something is considered unreal if it's existence is impossible. For example: unicorn, skyflower, horn on a rabbit, etc are considered unreal. For Nagarjuna, nothing in the empirical world is either real or unreal and every phenomenon in this empirical world seems to be self-contradictory if we look at it deeply. Let's try to understand the world from Nagarjuna's lens.

He first gives his theory of "No Origination" where he argues that nothing in this world has an independent arising. He considers two possibilities:
1. Can a thing be produced out of itself? If cause A gives rise to effect B, then A and B are the same for Nagarjuna. This means that here he is asking if an effect is a new production? To understand his argument, we can take the example of curd and milk. Given that curd gets produced from milk, is curd already in milk? If yes, then the curd is an already existing reality not a new origination. If we say that curd is not in milk and yet it gets produced, then everything should be producible from everything. hy can't a rabbit have a horn then?
2. Can a thing be produced out of something else? If a thing can't be produced out of itself, how can it be produced from non-self? If milk's transformation to curd can't be said to be "production" of curd, how can curd be produced from water?

Thus, nothing in the world has an independent arising and everything's existence is dependent on a web of interconnected causes. This means that nothing in the world is "real" as everything is relative and conditional. With this thought process, Nagarjuna reinterprets Buddha's statement that the world is beginningless and endless to mean that "world never began and thus won't ever end", instead of the popular interpreatation that the "world is eternal". Nagarjuna then asks: If something never began and has no ending, how can it have a real middle? The world isn't unreal for him but its only an illusion. Just like how we wrongly percieve snake in a rope due to ignorance, this world is the outcome of ignorance, also called Avidya. This is the same Avidya that Buddha explained as the starting link in his famous Dvadas Nidanas, the twelve links of Dependent Origination.

It's important to understand that an illusion is neither real or unreal. A dream is real as long as we are in it but the dream breaks once we realize it's a dream. A rope mistaken for a snake can cause trembling and fear but we calm down as soon as we realize it's an illusion. Thus, an illusion is real as long as we are in ignorance. Similarly, the world is only phenomenally real and not absolutely real. It is neither real, nor unreal, but lies in between. Middle is what Madhyamika in "Madhyamika Shunyavada" means. Nagarjuna's philosophy is neither affirmation (the world absolutely exists) nor negation (world is absolutely unreal), but the middle path. In his philosophy, the world is like a dream or an illusion and is real only as long as we are in ignorance but is ultimately unreal. 

Shunyavadins have compared the world to moving fire-band, a dream, an illusion, a reflection, an echo, a mirage, etc to explain their views but still, they have been interpreted as being nihilists. Nagarjuna denies the view that his philosophy is nihilism and says that pure negation doesn't even make sense as it necessarily pre-supposes affirmation. The empirical world should be understood as phenomenally real and we cannot condemn it using logic we have developed from functioning in this very world. A dreamer, while he is dreaming, cannot condemn his own dream.

Still, Nagarjuna analyses a lot of worldly phenomrnons and shows their self-contradictory nature. As an example. let's look at how he rejects the concept of motion. Assume that we are traveling from point A to B and are currently at point X between A and B. At any moment, are we moving on the path that has already been travlled? If AX has already been traveled, then it is not where we are moving now. Are we moving on path that is yet to be traveled? If XC is yet to be traveled, then we can't be moving on it yet. Then, where is motion happening and who is moving? He rejects seeing also in a similar manner. Are you seeing what is already seen or are you seeing what is yet to be seen at any moment?

He examines time and declares it to be relative and dependent as well. Past and future don't exist in this moment but the present moment is caused by the past moment and its existence is this dependent and conditional. Given that nothing in the world has an origination, time also is beginningless and no moment of this beginningless time has an independent existence.

Nagarjuna also analyzes substance and its attributes. We know only the attributes and not the actual substance. For example: We know an orange only as an orange colored, tangy tasting, circular, solid, object but orange as a substance might ve something more than the aggregate of these qualities. Now, Nagarjuna asks: Are the attributes dependent on the substance? Yes, else where would they exist? Redness needs red objects to exist. Is the substance dependent on its attributes? Also yes, a "red object" without redness is not a red object anymore. Thus, both the substance and attributes depend on each other and have a relative existence. Also, do attributes exist within the substance? This can't be the case as even if cut the tail of a cow, its cowness is still intact, it's still a cow. Do attributes live outside the substance? This can't be the case either. Thus, we don't know even know what a substance is beyond its attributes, and we don't know where attributes exist in the substance.

Nagarjuna even rejects Nirvana as being absolutely real. Liberation is necessarily dependent on bondage and vice versa. This means nirvana and bondage are also relative, dependent, and thus, mere illusions.

But we can ask, even the illusion that a rope is a snake requires a rope, a reflection requires a reflecting substance, and a dream requires a mind. Something absolute is required for an illusion to appear, just like a rotating wheel requires a non-rotating and stable center. Nagarjuna also accepts a non-dual absolute reality (Paramartha Satya) that is covered by or hidden behind the relative and illusory empirical reality. The transcendental absolute reality is where all plurality is merged. 

We can read about a brownie, study it, look at it under microscope, know its ingridients, hear about its sweetness, but still have no idea about what a brownie is as brownie is something that is experienced and can't be described. Similarly, the absolute truth is beyond description as per Nagarjuna. Paramartha Satya is beyond our intellect and can only be experienced. Any description of it is meant to be incomplete and hence, this transcendental reality is best described as "neti neti" (not this, not that).

Where does Shunya come into all this? We saw that Shunya means devoid and indescribable. We just saw that Paramartha Satya is indescribable but what is it devoid of? It is devoid of pluraility. It is devoid of this phenomenal reality, the Samvriti Satya. Thus, Parmartha Satya is prapancha shunya. 

Now, the empirical world is also indescribable as it doesn't fit into the any of the four ways our intellect categorizes things (Chatushkoti Vinirmukta):
1. Affirmation: World is not real as it is relative and conditional 
2. Negation: World is not completely unreal like a hare's horn
3. Affirmation and negation: World can't be both real and unreal as it would mean something like light and darkness can exist together
4. Neither affirmation nor negation: World can't be not real and not unreal as what is it then?

The phenomenal reality is thus indescribable by the intellect. It is devoid of absolute reality and is called Swabhav Shunya, which means that everything in this world is devoid of swabhava. Swabhava is the essential qualitiy that makes an object what it is, like fieriness is the essence of fire. The relative, conditional, and dependent nature of the world means that objects in the world lack Swabhava. For example: Curd can be produced only out of milk and thus curdness must exist in the milk as nothing can be a new arising in Nagarjuna's philosophy. If curdness is already in milk, that means curdness is not unique to curd. Also, if curdness is already in milk, why do we not call milk curd itself? 

What this tells us is that both the phenomenal world and the absolute reality are indescribable and beyond our intellect. Thus, all the philosophical attempts to explain or understand the world, creation, self, soul, etc through logic and reason are futile. Buddha realized that  nothing in this or the transcendental world can be explained by intellect and thus, became silent as per Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna warns against using Shunya itself as an intellectual concept. Shunyata is meant to help us rise above the entangling categories of intellect. It is beyond pure affirmation, pure negation, both, and neither. Shunyata is negation of all views but isn't a view itself.

While Nagarjuna denies the ultimate reality of this world, he does believe in it being phenomenally real. He says that only by using intellect can we realise the self-contradictory nature of this world and rise above it. Appearances are not to be utterly condemned because it is only through the lower that we can go to the higher. Ultimately, intellect must be transformed into Spiritual Experience to realize the absolute reality where all cries of the intellect are satisfied.

Thanks for reading!