---
layout: post
title: "Nyaya vs Kant"
subtitle: "Same same but different"
tags: ["philosophy"]
readtime: true
---

Among all the battles of philosophy, there's one that has been fought time and again across cultures and geographies. And yet, like everything else in philosophy, we don't have any answer to it. It's the battle on the source of right knowledge. While metaphysics deals with what right knowledge is, Epistemology is all about how we get the right knowledge. 

In Western Philosophy, the debate doesn't go beyond the superiority of reason vs. sense organs as the source of valid knowledge. But Indian Philosophy lays out six different ways (Pramanas) we can get the right knowledge (Prama) of reality. Let's look at the some views of the west first.

On one side, we have Rationalists like Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibnitz, who believe (to varying degrees) in superiority of reason when it comes to knowing and understanding reality. Descartes gave his famous dictum, Cogito Ergo Sum, that is "I think therefore I am", to define his existence as that of a "thinking" being. Spinoza also said "The human mind has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God", which highlights his rationalist approach to understanding reality. Leibnitz took rationalism to its extreme and gave "The Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR)", where he states that "No fact can hold or be real, and no proposition can be true, unless there is a sufficient reason why it is so and not otherwise."