---
layout: post
title: "Buddhism"
subtitle: ""
tags: ["philosophy"]
readtime: true
---

The story begins in 5th century BCE - nearly 2500 years ago - with the birth of Prince Siddhartha Gautama. His journey from a royal heir to the awakened Buddha is filled with spiritual determination and profound insights. Over time, many legends and miraculous tales got woven into his biography, making it difficult to tell separate historical facts from mythical legends. During his lifetime, none of his teachings or discourses were written down. 

In the 500 years that followed Buddha's passing, his disciples started compiling his teachings and discourses. Around 1st century BCE, the scripture now known as Pali Canon or Tipitaka (meaning 3 baskets in Pali) was first written down in Sri Lanka. The Pali Canon is divided into three distinct sections (Pali for baskets), namely Vinaya Pitaka, Sutta Pitaka, and Abhidhamma Pitaka. Vinaya Pitaka focuses on rules of conduct for monastic life, Sutta Pitaka preserves what is traditionally considered the direct speech of the Buddha, and Abhidhamma Pitaka dives into the philosophical exposition of the Buddha’s teachings. 

Buddha maintained silence on 10 metaphysical questions, such as whether the universe is eternal or infinite, whether the soul and body are the same or different, and what happens to an enlightened being after death. He discouraged his disciples from engaging in metaphysical speculation as it distracts one from true awakening. According to him, these questions arise from a fundamental misunderstanding of reality and the self. Quote (translated) from Sutta Pitaka:
> It is as if a man were wounded by an arrow thickly smeared with poison, and his friends and companions brought a surgeon... Suppose the man should say, ‘I will not let the surgeon pull out this arrow until I know who shot me...’ That man would die before he found out.”

Over time, his disciples interpreted his silence in their own ways which led to the development of over a 100 schools of Buddhism. In this post, I'll be focusing solely on the doctorines found within the Sutta Pitaka and Abhidhamma Pitaka. We can't be certain whether the philosophical expositions within these Pitakas came directly from Buddha. But Pali Canon is our only source of truth, so let's explore the Buddha of Pali Canon.

In his first sermon after attaining enlightenment (Nirvana), Buddha taught the four noble truths (Arya Satya), which form the foundation of all Buddhist teachings:
1. The world is full of suffering (Dukha)
2. There is a cause of suffering (Dukha Samudaya)
3. There is a cessation of suffering (Dukha Nirodha)
4. There is a path leading to the cessation of suffering (Dukha Nirodha Gamini Pratipada)

A lot of western philosophers have labeled Buddhism, and Indian Philosophy more broadly, as pessimistic, pointing to its emphasis on suffering. This criticism is a result of misunderstanding Indian Philosophy. While Indian Philosophy schools, including Buddhism, begin with suffering, they offer a path to transcend it and ultimately end it (liberation).

Another concept central to Buddha's teachings is the law of cause and effect, known in Pali as Pratitya Samutpada (dependent origination). He describes it as a universal natural law - a principle governing all physical and mental phenomena in this world - everything and everyone in the world is bound by the law of cause and effect. Pratitya Samutpada is best summarized by "THIS being, THAT arises", which is why it is also called the theory of **Dependent** Origination. The theory reveals that everything in the empirical world is bound in a web of causes and effects, and nothing has any independent existence - all that exists is relative, conditional, and dependent.

<edit from here>

Buddha uses the principle of Pratitya Samputpada to articulate his doctrine of impermanence (Anityavada). The debate between philosophical Eternalism and Nihilism has appeared in various forms across different traditions and eras. While Eternalism believes the ultimate reality to be real and eternal (sat), certain radical schools of Nihilism use metaphors like "flying horse" or "barren women's son" to describe the illusory and conceptually constructed nature of the world. Anityavada is the middle path between these two opposing views. Reality is neither eternal nor completely unreal for Buddha - the world and everything in it is temporary and its existence is dependent on a web of interconnected causes.

After Anityavada and Pratitya Samutpada, Buddhism talks about the Doctrine of Momentariness (Kshanikvada). Kshanikvada talks about how everything exists only for a moment (kshan). Here, kshan is the most granular unit of time - instant and moment are its closest english translations. Kshanikvada is only implicitly mentioned in the Abhidhamma Pitaka and isn't there in the Sutta Pitaka.

If we combine Pratitya Samutpada with Kshanikvada, we see that everthing is a cause and an effect in the same moment. Think about a rotating chariot wheel - in every moment, it is leaving its previous position , which is the cause of its current position. Simultaneously the wheel is also moving into a new position, which is the effect of its current position. This implies that any talk about the position of wheel is futile. Everything is arising and ceasing in the same moment - that is, things are always in a state of becoming and not being. As per Buddha, material things are aggregates of momentary material atoms and living beings are aggregates of five momentary skandhas (Sanghatavada). 

But then the question arises - if the building blocks of material things and living beings are momentary, why do we percieve the world and everything in it to be existing continuously? To answer this, Buddha gives the example of a flame: In a flame, every atom is continuously in flux but it's so rapid that the change is imperceptible to us. Another example to illustrate this: Videos are nothing but a sequence of frames being played at a speed that makes us percieve them as something continuous. Similarly, the continuous flow of momentary atoms and skandhas of the world through cause and effect is so fast that it gives an impression of things existing permanently. This the theory of Sanatanavada.

Does this mean that we are also momentary? As per Buddha, yes. The 5 skandhas that are responsible for all the mental and bodily processes of living beings as per Sanghatavada are: Rupa (body), feelings, perceptions, mental tendencies, and consciousness. When we look at these, we find all these to be kshanik - they change from moment to moment. This means what we percieve as "self" is just an ever-changing stream of these 5 skandhas. Also, if everything in the world is dependent and conditional as per Pratitya Samutpada, that means we are not merely temporary but also conditional and dependent in our existence. This is how Buddhism rejects the idea of an eternal unchanging soul within us and gave is No-Self Doctrine (Anatmavada). Buddha compares our love for eternal soul to the lover of a beautiful lady who has not been seen or heard by anyone. 

Note that Buddha only rejects the idea a permanent self. He does accept self or soul as a momentary aggregate - his idea of soul is very similar to that of Descartes. Both accept soul as the practical knower - that is, soul is the entity that does all the mental processes in us, like knowing, doubting, and thinking. Hume and Heraclitus hold very similar views to Buddha of Pali Canon about self. But if everything about us is momentary, how does rebirth happen? Is a permanent self not required for carry over of karmas? Buddha answers this with the analogy of a lamp, that is almost extinguished, lighting another lamp - Is the flame transferred still the old flame or a new flame? It's not the old flame as it is separate from it. It's also not independently new - just like the previous flame caused this new flame, our current life will cause the next life.

While the relative aspect of reality as per Buddha is the transitory empirical world, the absolute aspect of reality is Nirvana. What does it mean? The only thing permanent in the world is Nirvana - once someone gets it, there's no return. For Buddha, Nirvana simply means the cessation of suffering - he doesn't say if something continues to exist or not after Nirvana. When asked about what happens to the self after nirvana, Buddha uses the same analogy of a flame: Where does the flame go once it extinguishes? Does it make sense to talk about which direction it went it? 
