---
layout: post
title: "🌗 Jainism’s Philosophy of Truth in Shades"
subtitle: "Can you step in the same river twice?"
tags: ["Philosophy"]
readtime: true
---

In all schools of Indian Philosophy, Jainism's Philosophy stands out for multiple reasons. In a world where we crave absolutes and certainity, this school primarily asks "What if everyone's right?". 

Let's look very succinctly at an ideological war going on 2500 years ago, in both India and Greece. Vedanta school of philosophy believed that the ultimate reality can't be subject to change and can't be affected by time. For them, all change is an illusion (a very crude translation of the correct word here, mithya) and the ultimate reality itself is eternal and unchanging. Buddhism argued that everything in the world is subject to origination and decay. Thus, change is the only constant in the world. To put it more bluntly, impermanance is the only fundamental reality in this world and clinging to any permanence causes suffering. 

In Greece, Heraclitus (similar to Buddhism) famously said "You cannot step into the same river twice" -- he believed reality to be an ever changing dynamic process. For him, any stability that we percieve in the world is an illusion. While Heraclitus embraces becoming, Parmenides insists on being. For something to change, it must stop being what it is and start being something else. In this state of transition from one state to another, that thing enters the state of non-being (even if for a moment) and that is a logical impossibility. Thus, Parmenides (similar to Vendata) rejected all movement and change and argued that reality is eternal, indivisible, and unchanging and it is only our senses that deceive us into thinking otherwise.
